ble?" I often asked myself during the latter days of my tenure
61

 SEARCH         FOR     AN    ANSWER
         "R ow can anything         so good cause so much trou-

   at East Orange when the controversy over my work had
  reached its zenith. An aura of the absurd hung about the
  stubborn insistence for measurable scientific proof of the im-
  provement of bed-patients who could get up and walk and
  perform acts of which they had been incapable for years.
  Absurd or not, there it was and it would not go away when I
  closed my eyes. I counted myself vastly fortunate to have at
  St. Albans Hospital the means to search for an answer to the
  questions posed by my entry into the respiratory field. The
 outlook for the future was encouraging.
     Despite the frustrations encountered at East Orange, a
 significant achievement had come out of the work there.
 What had begun merely as a service to try to ease the discom-
 fort of the emphysema patients had developed into a distinc-
tive breathing technique with an equally distinctive method
of teaching. Of all the breathing techniques employed to
relieve the breathlessness of respiratory conditions, this was
the only one that enabled the patient to breathe without
artificial aids and to maintain himself independently-some
Dr. Breath
patients took care of themselves for as long as six months
without seeing me-once he had mastered the technique.
Moreover, a follow-up of patients showed enough incidence of
arrested progress of the disease to warrant the hypothesis that
the breathing technique had caused the arrest.

technique had been demonstrated repeatedly. At neither
place, however, had a concerted effort been made to describe
it or to find the means of teaching it. The East Orange doc-
tors wanted scientific documentation of results', whereas the
Philadelphia doctors, though personally interested in my theo-
ries and accomplishments, were professionally interested only
in the solution of their patients' immediate breathing prob-
lems. At St. Albans I would have for the first time the com-
plete professional cooperation required to conduct a proper
 investigation of the breathing technique I had developed over
 a period of two years of work with scores of advanced emphy-
 sema patients.

fully practical matters presented themselves. Again, money
was runnmg out and I would have to do my share toward ob-
tammg more for the continuation of the work. My sponsors

had entertained a singular displeasure with me in the wake of

my failure to fulfill the initial commibnent to train teachers.

They were not con~erned with scientific progress or advance

 of knowl~dge and did not permit themselves to be persuaded
 easily


 cnsis hung like a thunderhead on the horizon before resolving
 and freemg me to attend to the other matter.
 I The other matte.r ,had to do with scientific procedure. Fol-
  owmg Dr. DuBOIS suggestion, I had begun to think in
 terms of a controlled study series to settle a num b er 0f Issues


an Answer
and to find answers to the questions that had been plaguing
me since my first patient showed signs of improvement. In my
most recent forage for funds, I had secured a sum of money
for just such a study, but I had not completed the necessary
arrangements. Although St. Albans offered me splendid oppor-
tunity for independent research, it was not geared to con-
trolled study. I had to look elsewhere.
When I had had occasion to discuss my work in emphysema
with Dr. James Meneffee of the Duke Medical Center in Dur-
ham, North Carolina, he mentioned the possibility of interest-
ing Dr. Nicholas D'Esopo of the West Haven Veterans Ad-
ministration Hospital in such a project. I approached Dr.
D'Esopo with my proposal and, intrigued by the potential, he
agreed to undertake it.
Preparation for the study took me into the technical area of
respiratory function that lay beyond the scope of my knowl-
edge. I needed advice on tests and testing procedures most
likely to provide the scientific data required to document my
work satisfactorily. Another of Dr. DuBois' many courtesies
had been to refer me to Dr. Andre Cournand and Dr. Harry
W. Fritts of Bellevue Hospital in New York City, whose work
in the respiratory field is classic. I conferred with Dr. Fritts
and received his expert answers to the procedure problems.
His interest and encouragement heightened my own en-
thusiasm for the complicated enterprise my work was fast be-
. ..' to invest in either For a bleak interl u de th e financia
coming.
My first eight months at St. Albans were concurrent with
my final months at East Orange. All the while, I was arrang-
ing for the long-sought project at the West Haven VA Hos-
pital and seeing emphysema patients referred to me by people
with whom I had worked or by doctors who knew of my work.
62
63


Dr. Breath
The small snowball of East Orange was generating an ava-
lanche.

1961, my association of more than three years with the East
Orange VA Hospital ended. So much had happened to me at
East Orange that I came away with a distinct sense of leaving
behind some essential part of myself. I had seen men die
there of the various complications of disease. I had seen others
who had given up hope go out into a new life. Most impor-
tant, I had carried my interest in breathing into an area of
great human need and had received an opportunity to make a
contribution of knowledge in a field far too long neglected.

trusting children. Some of them were in too advanced a state
of illness to hope for more than relief from the sensation of
breathlessness; others were well able to take care of them-
selves if they applied themselves. By this time I had worked
~th more than a hundred advanced emphysema patients, and

along without me. The purpose of my instruction was to
enable them to regain control of their breathing and learn to
manage themselves independently. In final reassurance I told
them to get in touch if ever they needed me. That was the

weapon they required in the relentless battle against the terror
 of breathlessness.

  When the study began at West Haven, the program at St.

Albans had been underway for some time and proved to be

a~ .excellent supplement. The St. Albans doctors and tech-
rucians worked in close cooperation with me and we were
abl.e to obtain much corroborative data. The subjective-
objective .results of th e b reathimg instruction

what I might have predicted from experience. As soon as the

Search for an Answer
breathing patterns had been changed and developed, improve-
ment was dramatic. Although the doctors were familiar with
the earlier results, they invariably were surprised to observe
similar results in their own patients. As always, hearsay was
one thing; personal observation was another. Enthusiastic
from the start, they became even more so with the continuing
improvements the patients showed.
Because the respiratory department and out-patient clinic
at St. Albans were extensive and accessible to all branches of
the Armed Services, all sorts and conditions of men were
shunted to the clinic set up for the handling of breathing
problems. I saw such a wide variety of respiratory sufferers
that I eventually reached the stage in which nothing perturbed
me. I was mentally prepared to deal with anyone. Or, at least
I thought I was until I walked into my office one afternoon
and found an attractive, middle-aged woman sitting there
quietly waiting. Very definitely I was not mentally prepared
for this.
The Veterans Hospital had conditioned me to think in
terms of men as victims of respiratory disorder. The thought
that women, too, suffered respiratory complaints never oc-
curred to me. Simple-minded, but true. For a moment I was
nonplnssed, then habit took over and tended the routine,
while I considered the next move. I had instructed women
in breathing technique, of course, but those women had all
been well, and my instruction had been verbal. This unsuspect-
ing woman would be the first upon whom I exercised my new
technique involving palpation. I was concerned not so much
for myself as for her. I wondered how she wonld react. Since
I had no alternative, I continued the routine and asked her
to lie down on the examining table.
65


        Dr. Breath

  "Of course, Doctor," she replied and promptly did as she
was bidden.

   To her this was as impersonal as fitting a pair of shoes. Re-

lieved by her offhand response, I explained to her that I was

not a medical doctor but a respiratory specialist who would

teach her a new pattern of breathing to relieve her dyspnea,
or state of breathlessness.

    She accepted my explanation but persisted in calling me

 "Doctor," as did numerous patients and many of the hospital

 staff who had difficulty learning the pronunciation of my

 name. She was the wife of a naval officer, therefore was
 eligible for hospital services. Like my first private pupil, she
prompted me to consider my work from a new angle and to
reexamine some of my concepts. From her I learned more
about the effect of tension on the emphysema sufferer. Her
responses to instruction were different from those of most of
the men I taught, and I was impressed again by the influence
of multiple factors upon the respiratory system.

~ho came to the clinic, I also broadened the range of applica-
tion of my breathing technique through the variety of respira-
tory diseases and disorders I encountered. The St. Albans
docto~s were inte~ested in the practical application of the
techmque and assIgned me a new problem every time one
arose. Men came to me with chronic bronchitis, lung damage
fr~m tuberculosis scar tissue, asthma, lobectomies, whatever
mIght affect the respiratory system and make breathing diffi-
cult. The approach to each condition had to be different but
the results were always the same. As Soon as a certain point of
developme.nt of the new breathing pattern was reached, the
breathmg Improved and the condition itself showed improve-
ment.


Search for an Answer
I grew accustomed to seeing all stages of respiratory disease
and could recognize a respiratory sufferer almost at a glance.
One of the curses visited upon the diseased is that the un-
discerning eye fails to notice anything unusual, and even an
advanced emphysema patient can pass for normal among close
friends who do not know of his condition. The trained eye,
however, reads the signs and identifies the patient. When an
erect young Marine presented himself to rne for breathing
instruction, I looked him over and mentally questioned his
presence. He proved to be a remarkably novel case.
As he told me of his background, his distress and tensions
became evident in his inflection. He had been in service for
some time and had wanted to reenlist for another tour of
duty. He enjoyed athletics and kept himself in prime physical
condition by taking part in a nurnber of sports. He had no-
ticed that he got a little winded occasionally after particularly
-vigorous activity but thought nothing of it. Then he had gone
for his reenlistment physical exarnination. The medical ex-
aminer announced to him that he had advanced emphysema,
and before the bewildered young man could identify his
condition, he was shipped immediately to St. Albans for treat-
ment and possible medical discharge. The intensity of his
emotion almost broke through his Marine discipline. I could
believe his account, but I could not bring myself to believe
his emphysema. Nevertheless, I began instruction.
His manner of breathing indicated that some kind of irreg-
ularity was causing the sensation of breathlessness. I con-
ferred with his doctor, who was as puzzled as I. A series of
conferences with other doctors yielded no solution to the
mysterious malady. After several instruction sessions, the
breathing difficulty showed marked improvement. Still, no
66
67


Dr. Breath
consensus could be reached on the nature of the respiratory
disorder.


 remained divided pro and con emphysema. The young man
 simply refused to accept any form of illness. The desire of his
 life was reenlistment. He applied himself faithfully to the
 development of his new breathing pattern, and his respiratory
 condition improved accordingly. Within a few months he
Surprised everyone except me by passing his medical examina-
tion for reenlistment in the Marine Corps.

faulty breathing plus constant, excessive exertion upon the
r~spiratory mechanism. At East Orange I had had a few pa-
tients w~o had been professional athletes in their youth, but
at that time I was too busy with the urgencies of the moment
to search ~e past for causes. Now I knew a great deal more
about respiratory problems and was beginning to think in
tenus of causative factors. Among my St. Albans patients and
my pnvate pupils were former sportsmen and athletes. Some-
day, I promised myself, I would look into the breathing pat-
terns. and habits of athletes and examine their respiratory
condItion.


case histories of recurre t          .             '.
  .
tions which had mfhcted irreparable damage upon the tissue
of. the lungs, resulting finally in emphysema. For a while

neIther the doctors nor I gave the matter particular attention.
A new brea thmg pattern w dId                    '.

and m due time was discharged.

 d~en
a mltted to the hospital and his emphysema was found to


Search for an Answer
have resulted from extensive lung damage caused by "walk-
ing" pneumonia, we all paused to consider. This man phys-
ically could not afford to have another case of pneumonia, but
he was in such a state of susceptibility that he could very
easily go into another from a slight cold. He worked with
me regularly and made steady progress in his respiratory de-
velopment. He was kept under careful observation so that any
infection could be treated immediately. The precaution was
unnecessary. Within six months his condition had improved
enough for him to be discharged. We later learned that he
had become a detective.
We all decided to become detectives and make an investi-
gation into the effects of breathing patterns upon the inci-
dence of respiratory infection. A check of old cases and
observation of new ones indicated a correlation, whereupon
the doctors began to talk enthusiastically about exploratory
projects and introduction of breathing instruction into the
area of prophylaxis. I was very much pleased by their en-
thusiasm, but I could not undertake any more projects, tempt-
ing as they were. I should have liked to. There were many
things I wanted to do and would have done if only I did not
get tired.
Work at the St. Albans breathing clinic became so generally
known that doctors from other hospitals in the vicinity came
to confer and to observe. I was called upon frequently for
demonstrations of my management of breathing problems.
With each new group I always hoped that there would be
Some wise one who would know and could explain the tech-
nical complexities involved in my actions. There never was.
Although the process of breathing involves both anatomy and
physiology, neither branch of science has claimed it for thor-
68
69


Dr. Breath
ough exploration. It was a little-known territory waiting to be
mapped and charted. If I wanted a map, I would have to
make my own.


 powering. As the numerous side-effects of the breathing tech-
 nique on other systems of the body were noted, a resurgence
 of interest in prophylaxis occurred and a plan was devised to
bring the high-ranking service personnel to the hospital for a

regular program of instruction. I was flattered but not par-

ticularly happy. So much of my time was already consumed

by instruction that I often chafed at the slow advance of the

research. Furthermore, experience with older service officers

had taught me to approach them with a certain degree of

trepidation. Try as I would to ease around the problem, there

was no way to avoid imparting the unwelcome information

that their method of attaining their military posture was detri-

mental to breathing efficiency. I had had a variety of reactions.
After the atmosphere had cleared and communication could
be reestablished, I explained that the abnormal raised position
of the chest placed the respiratory structure out of alignment
and made proper functioning impossible. The point was con-
ceded as instruction got along, but I did not relish the thought
of indefinite repetition of the experience. Shortly after the
start of the program a crisis in Washington brought it to a
close. I had no regrets.

thing was always waiting to be done. With 'the aid of the
various technicians and the cooperation of the doctors, I had
been able to utilize testing procedures that Dr. Fritts had sug-
ges~ed. The results of the tests were exciting. They were pro-
viding the long-sought documentation needed to differentiate
and establish the breathing technique I had developed. At

Search for an Answer
last there was visible proof of the extraordinary occurrences
within the respiratory mechanism brought about by the
change in breathing pattern. I had a firm support for my
theories and conclusions. I had escaped the narrow confines
of subjective-objective reports.
Most dramatic of the earlier documentation were the inhale-
exhale X-rays. Before beginning instruction the patient was
X-rayed On the inhale and on the exhale. After a given period
of instruction he was X-rayed again in the same fashion. The
two sets of X-rays were superimposed to determine the motion
of the diaphragm in performing those respiratory functions.
They showed quite clearly an increased excursion of the dia-
phragm that could have been brought about only by the
strengthening and developing of the involuntary muscles
through the change in pattern of breathing.
The standard medical opinion then was that involuntary
muscles cannot be developed. If I thought for one moment
that contradiction of standard medical opinion is a desirable
contribution to science, I could not have been more remote
from reality. I had fallen squarely into a hornets' nest and was
in danger of being stung to death. Once more, those who were
there to witness accepted the evidence. Those who were not,
refused to believe that what had happened either had hap-
pened or could happen. The diaphragm, I found out too late,
was sacrosanct in the field of medicine. It was governed by
established laws and would not suffer tampering, certainly not
by an intruder upon the profession.
The previous controversy I had aronsed was naught com-
pared to this. Almost anybody who could spell diaphragm
had a great deal to say. Conventional thinkers made mince-
meat of me. Doctors and professionals who had heard of my
70
71

